Vigrahavyāvartanīvṛtti
----------
If an intrinsic nature of things, whatever they may be, exists nowhere, your [very] statement must be devoid of an intrinsic nature. It is not, therefore, in a position to deny the intrinsic nature [of the things].
Whether in the causes, in the conditions, in the combination of the causes and the conditions, or in a different thing, nowhere does exist an intrinsic nature of the things, whatever they may be. On this ground it is said that all things are void.For instance, the sprout is neither in the seed, its cause, nor in the things known as its conditions, viz., earth, water, fire, wind, etc., taken one by one, nor in the totality of the conditions, nor in the combination of the causes and the conditions, nor is it anything different from the causes and the conditions.Since there is nowhere an intrinsic nature, the sprout is devoid of an intrinsic nature. Being devoid of an intrinsic nature, it is void.And just as this sprout is devoid of an intrinsic nature and hence void, so also are all the things.Here we observe: if this is so, your statement that all things are void, must also be void.- why? - because your statement is neither in its cause - the [four] great elements, taken collectively or individually; - nor in its conditions, the efforts made in the breast, the throat, the lips, the tongue, the roots of the teeth, the palate, the nose, the head, etc.; nor in the combination of both [the cause and the condition]; - nor again is it anything apart from the cause and the conditions.Since it is nowhere, it is devoid of an intrinsic nature, [and] since it is devoid of an intrinsic nature, it is void. For this reason, it is incapable of denying the intrinsic nature of all things.A fire that does not exist cannot burn, a weapon that does not exist cannot cut, water that does not exist cannot moisten; similarly a statement that does not exist cannot deny the intrinsic nature of all things. In these circumstances, your statement that the intrinsic nature of all things has been denied, is not valid.
Now, if this sentence is endowed with an intrinsic nature, your former proposition is destroyed. There is a discordance, and you should state the special reason for it.
Now you may think, in order to avoid this effect: this sentence is endowed with an intrinsic nature, and being endowed with an intrinsic nature, it is non-void; thus the intrinsic nature of all things have been denied by it. – To this we reply: If so, then your former proposition ’All things are void’ is destroyed.Furthermore: Your statement is included in all things. [Now] if all things are void, for that reason is your statement non-void, - that statement which has denied the intrinsic nature of all things because it is [itself] non-void? Thus arises a controversial discussion in six points.How is it? – Well, (1) If all things are void, then your statement is void, being included in all things. [And] a negation by that [statement] which is void is a logical impossibility. In these cirkumstances, the negation that all things are void is not valid.If, on the other hand, the nagation that all things are void is not valid, then your statement is non-void. [But] that negation which it establishes because it is non-void, is not valid.Now, if all things are void, but your statement by which is effected the negation is non void, then your statement is not included in all things. Your proposition, there, is contradicted by the example.If, on the contrary, your statement is included in all things, and if all things are void, then your statement also is void. [And] since it is void, it cannot establish a negationLet us then assume that it is void and that there is the negation by it: ’All things are void’. But, in that case, all things, though void, would be capable of performing actions – which is absurd.Let it be granted, then, that all things are void and that they are not capable of performing actions; let the proposition not be contradicted by the example. In that case, however, the negation of the intrinsic nature of all things by your void statement is not valid.Furthermore: If your statement exists, there arises the following discordance: some things are void, and some other things, non-void. And you should state the special reason for it, explaining why some things are void, while others are not. You have, however, not stated that reason. In these circumstances, your statement that all things are void is not valid.
Moreover: If you think that it is like ’Do not make a sound’, [we reply:] this also is not valid. For here a sound that is existent prevents the other sound that will be.
You may think: When somebody says: ’Do not make a sound’, he himself makes a sound, and that sound prevents the other sound; in just the same manner, the void statement that all things are void prevents the intrinsic nature of all things.-To this we reply: This also is not valid. - Why ? - Because here a sound that is existent negates the future sound.In your case, however, it is not an existent statement that negates the intrinsic nature of all things. For, in your opinion the statement is non-existent, the intrinsic nature of all things is non-existent. Thus, it is like "Do not make a sound" is a defective proposition.
If you think that the same holds true of the negation of the negation also, that is false. It is your proposition which by virtue of its specific character is thus rendered defective, not mine.
You may think: ’According to this very method a negation of negation also is impossible; so your negation of the statement negating the intrinsic nature of all things is impossible’.-To this we reply: This also is false. - Why ? - Because the objection applies [only] to the specific character of your proposition, not to that of mine. It is you who say that all things are void, not I. The initial thesis is not mine. - In these circumstances, your staternent that, such being the case, a negation of negation also is impossible, is not valid.
Moreover: Now, if [you say that] you deny the things after having apprehended them through perception, [we reply:] that perception through which the things are apprehended does not exist.
You cannot say that you deny all things in the statement ’All things are void’, after having apprehended them through perception.Why? Because even perception, an instrument of true cognition, is void, being included in all things. The person who apprehends the things is alse void.Thus, there is no such thing as apprehension through perception, an instrument of true cognition; and a negation of that which is not apprehended is a logical impossibility. In these circumstances, your statement that all things are void is not valid.You think, perhaps, that you deny all things after having apprehended them through inference, verbal testimony and identification. To this we reply:
In our refutation of perception, we have [already] refuted inference, verbal testimony and identification, as well as the objects to be established by inference, verbal testimony and identification.
We have [already] refuted inference, identification and verbal testimony, in our refutation of the ‘instrument of true cognition’, perception. Just as perception, an ‘instrument of true cognition’, is void because all things are void, so also are inference, identification and verbal testimony void because all things are void.Those objects which are to be established by inference, verbal testimony and identification, are also void because all things are void.The person who apprehends the things through inference, identification and verbal testimony, is also void. Thus, there is no apprehension of things, and a negation of the intrinsic nature of things that are not apprehended is a logical impossibility. In these circumstances, your statement that all things are void is not valid.
Moreover:People conversant with the state of things think that the good things have a good intrinsic nature. The same distinction is made with regard to the rest [of the things] too (the bad things, and so on).
----------
And those things which lead to emancipation have an intrinsic nature that leads to emancipation. Similarly with the things which do not lead to emancipation, and so on, things which have been mentioned in connection with the state of things.
Thus, since the intrinsic nature of things is in this way seen to be of different kinds, your statement that all things are devoid of an intrinsic nature and that being devoid of an intrinsic nature they are void, is not valid. Furthermore:
If the things had no intrinsic nature, then even the name ‘absence of intrinsic nature’ would not exist; for there is no name without an object [to be named].
If all things were devoid of an intrinsic nature, there would, nevertheless, be an absence of intrinsic nature. [But] then, even the name ‘absence of intrinsic nature’ would not exist.- Why? - Because there is no name whatsoever without an object [to be named].Thus, since the name exists, there is an intrinsic nature of the things; and since they have an intrinsic nature, all things are non-void.Your statement, therefore, that all things are devoid of an intrinsic nature and that, being devoid of an intrinsic nature, they are void, is not valid.
Moreover: Now you may say: There is an intrinsic nature, but that does not belong to the things. There is, then, an intrinsic nature without the things, and you should explain to what it belongs.
Now you may fancy: Let there be no name without an object; there is an intrinsic nature, but that does not belong to the things; thus, the voidness of the things because of their being devoid of an intrinsic nature will be established, and the name will not be without an object [to be named ].- To this we reply:You should explain that object, apart from the things, to which now belongs thus that intrinsic nature. You have, however, not explained that.Hence your assumption: ‘there is an intrinsic nature but it does not belong to the things’, is ruled out.
Furthermore: Since the negation ’There is no pot in the house’ is seen to be only of an existent, this negation of yours is that of an existent intrinsic nature.
It is only an existent object that is negated, not a non-existent one, For instance, when it is said: ‘There is no pot in the house’, it is an existent pot that is negated, not a non-existent one.In like manner it follows that the negation ‘The things have no intrinsic nature’ is the negation of an existent intrinsic nature, not of a non-existent one.In these circumstances, the statement that all things are devoid of an intrinsic nature is not valid. By the very fact that a negation is possible, the intrinsic nature of all things is non-negated.
If that intrinsic nature does not exist, what, then, do you negate by this statement? The negation of a non-existent is established without words.
If that intrinsic nature does not really exist, what do you negate by this statement: ‘All things are devoid of an intrinsic nature’?The negation of a non-existent, e.g., that of the coolness of fire or of the heat of water is established without words. Furthermore:
Just as ignorant people wrongly perceive a mirage as water, [and that wrong perception is removed by some person who knows, in like manner you may think that] you negate a wrong perception of a non-entity.
When ignorant people wrongly perceive a mirage as water, a scholarly person, in order to remove that perception, says: ‘But that mirage is without water’.Likewise, you may think that the statement ‘All things are devoid of an intrinsic nature’ is meant for removing people’s perception of an intrinsic nature in things that are devoid of an intrinsic nature. To this we reply:
But this being so, the aggregate of the six following things exists: the perception, the object to be perceived, the perceiver of that object, the negation, the object to be negated, and the negation.
If this is so, then the perception of people, the object to be perceived, people who perceive it, the negation of that wrong perception, the object to be negated, viz., the wrong perception, and people like you who negate this perception - all these exist. The aggregate of the six is, therefore, established.[And] that aggregate of the six being established, your statement that all things are void is not valid.
You may think that there is no perception, no object to be perceived, and no perceiver. But, in that case, there is no negation, no object to be negated, and no negator.
If, in order to avoid this defect, you say that there is no perception, no object to be perceived, and no perceiver, then even the negation of the perception, viz., the statement that all things are void, does not exist. The object to be negated and the negators, too, do not exist.
And if there is no negation, no object to be negated and no negator, then all things are established, as well as their intrinsic nature.
And if there is no negation, no object to be negated, and no negator, then all things are non-negated, and they have an intrinsic nature.
Furthermore:Your ‘reason’ [for establishing your thesis] cannot be established. How can there be, indeed, a ‘reason’ for you, when everything is devoid of an intrinsic nature? And this thesis of yours which is devoid of a ‘reason’, cannot be established.
Your reason for the thesis that all things are devoid of an intrinsic nature cannot be established. - Why? –Because all things, being devoid of an intrinsic nature, are void. How, therefore, can there be a reason? [And] if there is no reason, how indeed can the thesis devoid of a reason, namely that all things are void, be established?- In these circumstances, your statement that all things are void is not valid.
Moreover: If your negation of the intrinsic nature is established without any reason, my affirmation of the things’ being endowed with an intrinsic nature is also established without any reason.
----------
If you think that the fact that the things are devoid of an intrinsic nature is the existence of the reason, [we answer:] that argument is not valid.- Why? - Because there is nothing in the world that is existent, while being devoid of an intrinsic nature.
----------
It is not possible to hold that the negation comes first and then the thing to be negated. Nor is it possible to hold that the negation comes after [the thing to be negated], or that they are simultaneous. - The intrinsic nature of the things is, therefore, existent.
It is not possible to hold that the negation comes first and then the thing to be negated. For, if the thing to be negated does not exist, of what is the negation?Nor is it possible to hold that the negation comes after the thing to be negated. For, if the thing to be negated is [already] established, what purpose is served by the negation?Now [if you say that] the negation and the thing to be negated are simultaneous, [we answer]: even in that way, the negation is not the cause of the object to be negated, nor is the object to be negated the cause of the negation,just as of the two horns, grown simultaneously, the right horn is not the cause of the left horn, nor is the left horn the cause of the right horn.- In these circumstances, your statement that all things are void is not valid.
If my statement does not exist in the combination of the cause and the conditions, or independently of them, then the voidness of the things is established because of their being devoid of an intrinsic nature.
If my statement does not exist in its cause and in its conditions ...,it is devoid of an intrinsic nature and thus void. Now the voidness of this statement of mine is established because of its being devoid of an intrinsic nature.And just as this statement of mine is void because of its being devoid of an intrinsic nature, so also are all things void because of their being devoid of an intrinsic nature.In these circumstances, your statement: ‘Because of the voidness of your statement it is not possible to establish the voidness of all things’, is not valid.
FurthermoreThat nature of the things which is dependent is called voidness, for that nature which is dependent is devoid of an intrinsic nature.
You have not understood the meaning of the voidness of the things. So you have set out to criticize me, saying: ‘Since your statement is devoid of an intrinsic nature, the negation of the intrinsic nature of the things is not valid’.That nature of the things which is dependent is voidness.- Why - Because it is devoid of an intrinsic nature. Those things which are dependently originated are not, indeed, endowed with an intrinsic nature; for they have no intrinsic nature.- Why? - Because they are dependent on causes and conditions. If the things were by their own nature, they would be even without the aggregate of causes and conditions.But they are not so. Therefore they are said to be devoid of an intrinsic nature, and hence void.Likewise it follows that my statement also, being dependently originated, is devoid of an intrinsic nature, and hence void.- But things like a cart, a pot, a cloth, etc., though devoid of an intrinsic nature because of being dependently originated, are occupied with their respective functions, e.g., carrying wood, grass and earth, containing honey, water and milk, and protecting from cold, wind and heat.Similarly this statement of mine, though devoid of an intrinsic nature because of being dependently originated, is engaged in the task of establishing the being-devoid-of-an-intrinsic-nature of the things.- In these circumstances, your statement: ‘Your statement, being devoid of an intrinsic nature, is void, and, being void, it cannot negate the intrinsic nature of all things’, is not valid.
Furthermore:Suppose that a person, artificially created, should prevent another artificial person, or that a magic man should prevent another man created by his own magic [from doing something]. Of the same nature would be this negation.
(not complete)There, the artificial man who is prevented is void,and he (the artificial man) who prevents is also void; the magic man who is prevented is void, and he (the magic man) who prevents is also void.In like manner, a negation of the intrinsic nature of all things by my statement is possible, even though this statement is void.In these circumstances, your statement: ‘Because of the voidness of your statement, a negation of the intrinsic nature of all things is not possible’, is not valid.In this way is also prevented the controversial discussion in six points that you spoke of. For, this being so, it is not true that my statement is not included in all things; there is nothing that is non-void; nor are all things non-void.Now about your statement [contained in v. 11 above]:
This statement is not endowed with an intrinsic nature. There is therefore no abandonment of position on my part. There is no discordance, and [hence] there is no special reason to be stated.
This statement of mine, being dependently originated, is not endowed with an intrinsic nature. As previously stated, since it is not endowed with an intrinsic nature, it is void.And since this statement of mine is void, just as all other things are void, there is no discordance.For, there would be a discordance [only] if we said: This statement is non-void, while all other things are void. We, however, do not say that. There is, therefore, no discordance.And since the following discordance, this statement is non-void while all other things are void, does not exist, we do not have to state the special reason: for this reason this statement is non-void while all [other] things are void.- In these circumstances, your statement: ‘There is on your part an abandonment of position, there is a discordance, and you should state the special reason’, is not valid.(noe english)
The example given by you: ‘It is like “Do not make a sound” is not appropriate. There a sound is prevented by another sound, but the case here is not just the same.
This example, moreover, is not ours. That void statement does not prevent voidness as a person, when he says: ‘Do not make a sound’, makes a sound and at the same time prevents a sound.- Why? - Because, in this example, a sound is prevented by another sound. But the case here is not the same.We say: all things are devoid of an intrinsic nature, and hence void.- Why? -
Because, if things devoid of an intrinsic nature were prevented by something devoid of an intrinsic nature, with the cessation of [their] being devoid of an intrinsic nature would be established [their] being endowed with an intrinsic nature.
This example would be appropriate if by a statement devoid of an intrinsic nature were prevented things devoid of an intrinsic nature - as by the sound: ‘Do not make a sound’ is prevented another sound.Here, however, by a statement devoid of an intrinsic nature is negated the intrinsic nature of the things. If by a statement devoid of an intrinsic nature were negated the things’ being devoid of an intrinsic nature, the things, by the very fact of being negated in their quality of being devoid of an intrinsic nature would be endowed with an intrinsic nature.Being endowed with an intrinsic nature, they would be non-void. We, however, declare that the things are void, not that they are non-void. This, therefore, is a non-example.
Or suppose that an artificial person should prevent the false notion of somebody who with regard to an artificial woman thinks: ‘This is a woman’. This would be like that.
Or suppose that in an artificial woman, void of an intrinsic nature, some man should have the false notion that it is really a woman and, as a result of that false notion, should feel desire for her.The Tathāgata or a disciple of the Tathāgata would [then] create an artificial man [and] the latter would dispel the false notion of that man, through the power of the Tathāgata or of the disciple of the Tathāgata.Likewise, by my void statement, comparable to the artificial man, is prevented the idea of an intrinsic nature in all things which are devoid of an intrinsic nature and comparable to the artificial woman.Thus, this is an appropriate example for establishing voidness, not the other one.
Or this reason is similar in nature to the thesis to be established, for sound has no [real] existence. We do not speak, however, without having recourse to the conventional truth.
The reason ‘It is like ‘‘Do not make a sound’’’ is of the same nature as the thesis to be established - Why? - Because all things, being devoid of an intrinsic nature, are alike.That sound, being dependently originated, has no existence by its own nature. [And] since it has no existence by its own nature, your statement: ‘For here a sound that is existent prevents the other sound that will be’, is precluded.It is not, however, without having recourse to the conventional truth, it is not by rejecting the conventional truth, that we say: All things are void.For it is not possible to teach the absolute truth without having recourse to the conventional truth. As it is said: ‘The transcendent truth cannot be taught without having recourse to the conventional truth. [And] Nirvāṇa cannot be attained without realizing the transcendent truth’Thus, all things are void like my statement, and that all things are devoid of an intrinsic nature, follows in both ways [i.e., both by virtue of the ‘reason’ and of the thesis to be established]’.Now about your statement [contained in v. IV]:
If I had any proposition , then this defect would be mine. I have, however, no proposition. Therefore, there is no defect that is mine.
If I had any proposition, then the defect previously stated by you would be mine, because it would affect the specific character of my proposition. [But] I have no proposition.Thus [we observe:] When all things are void, perfectly appeased and by nature isolated, how can there be a proposition?How can something affect the specific character of a proposition? [And] how can there be a defect, caused by the fact of affecting the specific character of a proposition?- In these circumstances, your statement: ‘The defect is only yours because it affects the specific character of your proposition’, is not valid.
If I apprehended something with the help of perception, etc., then I would either affirm or deny. [But] since that thing does not exist, I am not to blame.
If I apprehended something with the help of the four pramāṇas, viz., perception, inference, identification and verbal testimony, or with the help of one of these, then only would I either affirm or deny.[But] since I do not even apprehend an object of any kind, I neither affirm nor deny.In these circumstances, your criticism: ‘If [you say that] you deny the things after having apprehended them through one of the pramāṇas, viz., perception, etc., [we reply:] those pramāṇas do not exist, nor do exist the objects to be apprehended through them’, does not concern me at all.
Furthermore:If such and such objects are established for you through the pramāṇas, tell me how those pramāṇas are established for you.
If you think that such and such ‘objects of true cognition’ are established through the ‘instruments of true cognition’, just as the things to be measured are established through the measuring instruments, [we ask:] How are those ‘instruments of true cognition’, viz., perception, inference, identification and verbal testimony, established?If [you say that] the pramāṇas are established without the help of pramāṇas, then [your] proposition that [all] objects are established through pramāṇas is abandoned.If the pramāṇas are established through other pramāṇas, then there is an infinite series. If you think that the ‘objects of true cognition’ are established through the ‘means of true cognition’ and that those ‘means of true cognition’ are established through other ‘means of true cognition’, then there follows an infinite series - What harm is there if there is an infinite series?
Neither the beginning nor the middle nor the end can then be established.
If there is an infinite series, the beginning cannot be established. - Why? - Because those pramāṇas are established through other pramāṇas, and those others again through other pramāṇas. Thus there is no beginning.[And] if there is no beginning, how can there be a middle? How can there be an end?Consequently, the statement that those pramāṇas are established through other pramāṇas is not valid.
Now, if [you think that] those pramāṇas are established without pramāṇas, then your philosophic position is abandoned. There is a discordance, and you should state the special reason for that.
Now, if you think: those pramāṇas are established without pramāṇas; the objects to be cognized, however, are established through the pramāṇas, then your position that [all] objects are established through pramāṇas is abandoned.There is, moreover, a discordance, namely that some objects are established through pramāṇas, while some others are not.And you should state the special reason why some objects are established through pramāṇas, while some others are not.But you have not stated that. Thus this assumption, too, is not valid.The opponent replies: The pramāṇas establish themselves as well as other things. As it is said:‘Fire illuminates itself as well as other things. Likewise, the pramāṇas establish themselves as well as other things’....Here we observe:
This is a defective proposition. Fire does not illuminate itself, for its non-perception is not seen to be comparable to that of a pot in darkness.
Your proposition that the pramāṇas establish themselves as well as other things like fire [that illuminates itself as well as other things] is defective. For fire does not illuminate itself.A pot, not illuminated by fire, is first not perceived in darkness. Then, being illuminated by fire, it is perceived. If, in the same manner, fire, not being illuminated, first existed in darkness and then were illuminated, it would be possible to say: it illuminates itself.This, however, is not the case. Thus this assumption, too, is not valid.
Furthermore: If, as you say, fire illuminates itself as it illuminates other things, then it will also burn itself.
If, as you say, fire illuminates itself just as it illuminates other things, then it will also burn itself just as it burns other things.This, however, is not the case. In these circumstances, your statement that fire illuminates itself as it illuminates other things, is not valid’.
Besides: If, as you say, fire illuminates both other things and itself’, then darkness will cover both other things and itself’.
If in your opinion fire illuminates both other things and itself, then its opposite, darkness, too, would cover both other things and itself.This, however, is not seen. In these circumstances, your statement that fire illuminates both other things and itself is not valid.
There is no darkness in fire nor in something else in whichfire stands.How can it [then] illuminate? For illumination is destruction of darkness.
Here, in fire, there is no darkness. Nor is there any darkness where fire is. Now, illumination is obstruction caused to darkness.But since there is no darkness in fire nor where fire is, what is that darkness which is obstructed by fire, and by virtue of whose obstruction it illuminates both other things and itselfThe opponent replies: But is it not true that fire illuminates both other things and itself, for this very reason that there is no darkness in fire nor where fire is. For, in the very process of its origination, fire obstructs darkness.If there is no darkness in fire nor where fire is, it is because in the very process of its origination fire illuminates both other things and itself. Here we observe:
It is wrong to say that fire illuminates in the very process of its origination. For, in the very process of its origination, fire does not come in contact with darkness.
The opinion that fire, in the very process of its origination, illuminates both other things and itself is not tenable. - Why? -Because, in the very process of its origination, fire does not come in contact with darkness; since it does not come in contact with it, it does not destroy it; and since darkness is not destroyed, there is no illumination.
Or, if fire destroyed darkness even without coming in contact with it, then this fire, standing here, would destroy darkness in all the worlds.
Or, if you think that fire destroys darkness even without coming in contact with it, then this fire, standing here at this moment, will equally destroy the darkness existing in all the worlds, without coming in contact with it.This, however, is not seen to be the case. Thus, your opinion that fire destroys darkness even without coming in contact with it is not valid.
Furthermore:If the pramāṇas are self-established, then the ‘means of true cognition’ are established for you independently of the ‘objects of true cognition’. For self-establishment does not require another thing.
The opponent replies: What defect will ensue if the ‘means of true cognition’ do not require the objects to be cognised? Here we observe:
If you think that the ‘means of true cognition’ are established independently of the ‘objects to be cognized’, then those are of nothing.
If [you think that] the ‘means of true cognition’ are established independently of the ‘objects to be cognized’, then those pramāṇas are pramāṇas of nothing. Thus there is a defect.If, however, the pramāṇas are pramāṇas of something, they do not then become ’means of true cognition’ independently of the ‘objects to be cognized’.
[The opponent may reply:] If it is admitted that they are established in relation [to the objects to be cognized], what defect is there? - [The defect is that] what is [already] established is established [again]. For something that is not established does not require something else.
If it is admitted that the ‘means of true cognition’ are established in relation to the ‘objects to be cognized’, then the four ‘means of true cognition’, which are [already] established, are established [anew].- Why? -Because an object that is not established does not require something else. For instance, Devadatta, who is not [yet] established, does not require anything whatever.But it is not admissible that something that is [already] established be established [anew]. One does not do something that is [already] done.
Besides: If the pramāṇas are at all events established in relation to the prameyas, the prameyas are not established in relation to the pramāṇas.
If the pramāṇas are established in relation to the prameyas, then the prameyas are not established in relation to the pramāṇas. - Why? -Because the object to be established does not establish the instrument by which it is established. The pramāṇas, however, it is said, are the instruments by which the prameyas are established.
And if the prameyas are established even independently of the pramāṇas, what do you gain by establishing the pramāṇas? That whose purpose they serve is [already] established.
31
Besides, if you establish the pramāṇas in relation to the prameyas, then there is certainly an interchange of pramāṇas and prameyas.
Moreover, if you think, in order to avoid the defect stated before, that the ‘means of true cognition’ exist only in relation to the ‘objects to be cognized’, then there is an interchange of pramāṇas and prameyas.Your pramāṇas become prameyas, because they are established by the prameyas. And the prameyas become pramāṇas, because they establish the pramāṇas.
Now, if you think that through the establishment of the pramāṇas are established the prameyas, and that through the establishment of the prameyas are established the pramāṇas, then neither the prameyas nor the pramāṇas are established for you.
Now, if you think that through the establishment of the pramāṇas are established the prameyas - because the prameyas require the pramāṇas - and that through the establishment of the prameyas are established the pramāṇas - because the pramāṇas require the prameyas -then neither the prameyas nor the pramāṇas are established. -Why? -
Because, if the prameyas owe their establishment to the pramāṇas, and if those pramāṇas are to be established by those very prameyas, how will the pramāṇas establish [the prameyas]?
Because, if the prameyas owe their establishment to the pramāṇas, and if those pramāṇas are to be established by those very prameyas, [we encounter the following difficulty:] the prameyas not having been established, the pramāṇas are not established, for their cause is not established. How, then, will the pramāṇas establish the prameyas?
And if the pramāṇas owe their establishment to the prameyas, and if those prameyas are to be established by those very pramāṇas, how will the prameyas establish [the pramāṇas]?
And if the pramāṇas owe their establishment to the prameyas, and if those prameyas are to be established by those very pramāṇas, [we encounter the following difficulty:] the pramāṇas not having been established, the prameyas are not established, for their cause is not established. How, then, will the prameyas establish the pramāṇas?
If the son is to be produced by the father, and if that father is to be produced by that very son, tell me which of these produces which other.
Supposing somebody said: the son is to be produced by the father, and that father is to be produced by that very son, tell me who is to be produced by whom.In exactly the same manner you say: the prameyas are to be established by the pramāṇas, and those very pramāṇas in turn are to be established by those very prameyas. Now, which of these are to be established for you by which others?
Tell me which of these is the father, and which other the son. Both of them bear, indeed, the marks of a father and that of a son, wherefore we have a doubt here.
Of that father and that son, mentioned before, which is the son, and which other the father?Both of them, as producers, bear the mark of a father, and, as produced, the mark of a son. We have a doubt here: which of these is the father, and which other the son?In just the same manner, of these pramāṇas and prameyas of yours, which are the pramāṇas, and which others the prameyas?For both of these, as those which establish, are pramāṇas, and as those which are to be established, prameyas. We have a doubt here as to which of these are the pramāṇas, and which others the prameyas.
The pramāṇas are not established by themselves or by one another or by other pramāṇas. Nor are they established by the prameyas, or accidentally.
Perception is not established by that very perception, inference is not established by that very inference, identification is not established by that very identification, and testimony is not established by that very testimony.Nor are they established by one another, i.e., perception by inference, identification and testimony, inference by perception, identification and testimony, identification by perception, inference and testimony, and testimony by perception, inference and identification. Nor are perception, inference, identification and testimony established, respectively, by another perception, another inference, another identification, and another testimony.Nor are the pramāṇas established by the prameyas, taken collectively or individually, each pramāṇa being established either by the corresponding prameya or by the other prameyas too.Nor are they established accidentally. Nor again are they established by a combination of the causes mentioned before, whatever their number: twenty, thirty, forty or twenty-six.-In these circumstances, your statement: ‘Because the things to be cognized are to be apprehended through the means of true cognition, those things to be cognized exist as well as those means of true cognition through which those things to be cognized are apprehended’, is not valid.
If people conversant with the state of things say that the good things have a good intrinsic nature, that has to be stated in detail.
People conversant with the state of things think that the good things have a good intrinsic nature. But that has to be stated by you in detail:this is that good intrinsic nature; these are those good things; this is that good consciousness; this is that intrinsic nature of the good consciousness, and so on.This, however, is not seen to be soThus your statement that the intrinsic nature of each individual thing has been explained is not valid.
Furthermore:If the good intrinsic nature originates dependently it is an extrinsic nature of the good things.How can it be thus their intrinsic nature?
If the intrinsic nature of the good things originates in dependence upon the cause-condition complex, how can it, being born of an extrinsic nature, be the intrinsic nature of the good things?The same holds true of the bad and other things. – In these circumstances, your statement that the good intrinsic nature of the good things has been explained, as well as the bad intrinsic nature of the bad things, and so on, is not valid.
Now, if [you think] that intrinsic nature of the good things originates without depending on anything, then there would be no practice of religious life.
Now, if you think that the good intrinsic nature of the good things originates without depending on anything, and that the same is true of the bad intrinsic nature of the bad things and of the indeterminate intrinsic nature of the indeterminate things, then there is no practice of religious life.- Why? - Because, if this is so, one rejects Dependent Origination. By rejecting Dependent Origination, one rejects the vision of Dependent Origination.For if Dependent Origination does not exist, there can be no question of its vision. If there is no vision of Dependent Origination, there is no vision of Dharma.For the Lord has said:‘0 monks, he who sees the pratītyasamutpāda sees the Dharma’.[And] if one does not see the Dharma, there is no practice of religious life. Or, rejecting Dependent Origination, one rejects the origination of sorrow. For Dependent Origination is the origination of sorrow.By rejecting the origination of sorrow, one rejects sorrow. For, if there is no origination, how will that sorrow originate?If sorrow and [its] origination are rejected, then the cessation of sorrow is rejected. For if there is no origination of sorrow, what will come to cease through abandonment?[And] if the cessation of sorrow is rejected, the Way is rejected. For, if there is no cessation of sorrow, for obtaining what will there be a way to the cessation of sorrow?Thus, the Four Noble Truths will cease to exist. If they do not exist, there is no result of monasticism.For it is through the vision of [those.] Truths that the results of monasticism are attained. [And] if the results of monasticism do not exist, there is no practice of religious life.
Furthermore:There would be neither merit nor demerit nor the worldly conventions . All things, being endowed with an intrinsic nature, would be permanent - for that which has no cause is permanent.
If this is so, what defect follows for you who reject DependentOrigination?- There is no merit. There is no demerit. Nor do exist the worldly conventions. - Why? -Because all that is dependently originated; how will it be, if there is no dependent origination?Moreover, being endowed with an intrinsic nature, not dependently originated and devoid of a cause, it would be permanent. - Why? -Because things that have no cause are permanent.- There would thus follow that very non-practice of religious life. And you would contradict your own tenet- Why? - Because the Lord has taught that all conditioned things are impermanent. They become permanent, because they are [Supposed to be] endowed with an intrinsic nature and hence [to be] permanent.
And the same defect exists also with regard to the bad things, the indeterminate things, those things which lead to emancipation, and so on. Thus, all that is conditioned certainly becomes for you unconditioned.
And the same method that has been indicated, concerning the good things, applies also to the bad things, to the indeterminate things, to those things which lead to emancipation, and so on.Thus all that, though conditioned, turns out to be unconditioned for you. - Why? -Because, there being no cause, there is no origination, no subsistence and no destruction. [And] there being no origination, no subsistence and no destruction, all that is conditioned turns out to be unconditioned, because of the absence of the specific character of’ the conditioned.In these circumstances, your statement that all things are non-void because the good and other things have an intrinsic nature, is not valid.
He who says that the name is existent, deserves indeed the answer from you: ‘There is an intrinsic nature". We, however, do not say that.
He who says that the name is existent, deserves the answer from you: ‘There is an intrinsic nature’. That intrinsic nature, which is designated by the existent name, must also be, for that reason, existent.For a non-existent intrinsic nature cannot have anexistent name. We, however, do not say that the name is existent. Since the things have no intrinsic nature, that name also is devoid of an intrinsic nature. For that reason, it is void, and, being void, it is non-existent.- In these circumstances, your statement that because of the existence of the name the intrinsic nature I’s existent, is not valid.
Furthermore:Does this name ‘non-existent’ designate something existent or non-existent. Be it the name of an existent or of a non-existent thing, in both ways your position is abandoned.
Does this name ‘non-existent’ designate something existent or non-existent? Be it the name of an existent or of a non-existent thing, in both ways the proposition is abandoned.If [the thing named is] existent, the proposition [‘The name is:] "Non-existent... is abandoned. For the same thing cannot be now non-existent, now existent. If, on the other hand, [you say that] the thing named is non-existent, [it has to be replied:] that which is non-existent has no name.
Furthermore:We have already established the voidness of all things. This criticism, therefore, turns out to be one of something which is not a proposition.
Here we have already established in detail the voidness of all things. Even the name has already been stated to be void.Now you, assuming non-voidness, have returned to the charge. If the things had nointrinsic nature, then even the name ‘absence of intrinsic nature’would not exist. Your criticism, therefore, turns out to be one of something which is not a proposition. We do not say, indeed, that the name is existent.
‘Now [you may say:] There is an intrinsic nature, but that does not belong to the things’ - this suspicion of yours is not shared by us.
We do not, indeed, deny the intrinsic nature of the things. Nor do we affirm the intrinsic nature of a certain object apart from the things.Now, this being so, your criticism: ‘If the things are devoid of an intrinsic nature, you should explain to what other object, apart from thethings, there now happens to belong the intrinsic nature, is thrown far away. It is no criticism at all.
If [it is true that] negation is only of an existent, then this voidness is established - for you negate the things’ being devoid of an intrinsic nature.
If negation is only of the existent and not of the non-existent, and if you negate the being-devoid of-an-intrinsic-nature of all things, then the being-devoid-of-an-intrinsic-nature of all things is established.Since, in virtue of your statement, negation exists’, and since the being-devoid-of-an-intrinsic-nature of all things has been negated, voidness is established.
Now, if’ you negate voidness, and if that voidness does not exist, then your position that negation is of an existent is abandoned.
Now, if you negate the being-devoid-of-an-intrinsic-nature of all things, i.e. their voidness, and if that voidness does not exist, then your proposition that negation is of an existent and not of a non-existent, is abandoned’.
Besides:I do not negate anything, nor is there anything to be negated. You, therefore, calumniate me when you say: ‘You negate’.
Even that you could rightly say, if I negated something. I, however, do not negate anything, for there is nothing to be negated.Thus, while, all things being void, there is neither a thing to be negated nor a negation, you make an absurd calumny when you say: ‘You negate’.
Regarding your assertion that the statement of the negation of the non-existent is established without words, we observe: Here speech makes it known as n on-existent, it does not deny it.
Regarding your statement: ‘The negation of the non-existent is established even without words; what purpose is, therefore, served by your statement “All things are devoid of an intrinsic nature” we observe:The statement: ‘All things are devoid of an intrinsic nature’, does not make all things devoid of an intrinsic nature.But, since there is no intrinsic nature, it makes known that the things are devoid of an intrinsic nature.Here is an example: While Devadatta is not in the house, somebody says that Devadatta is in the house. On that occasion, somebody tells him in reply: ‘He is not [in the house]’.That statement does not create Devadatta’s non-existence, but only makes known Devadatta’s non-existence in the house.Similarly the statement ‘things have no intrinsic nature’ does not create the being-devoid-of-an-intrinsic-nature of the things, but makes known the absence of an intrinsic nature in all things.- In these circumstances, your statement: ‘If there is no intrinsic nature, what purpose is served by the statement “There is no intrinsic nature”? The absence of an intrinsic nature is established even without words’, is not appropriate.
You have introduced a great deliberation with the example of the mirage. Listen to the decision in that matter also, showing how that example is appropriate.
----------
If that perception were by its own nature, it would not be dependently originated. That perception, however, which comes into existence dependently is voidness indeed.If that perception were by its own nature, it would not be dependently originated. That perception, however, which comes into existence dependently is voidness indeed.
If that perception of a mirage as water were by its own nature, it would not be dependently originated.Since, however, it comes into existence in dependence upon the mirage, the wrong sight and the distracted attention, it is dependently originated.And since it is dependently originated, it is indeed void by its own nature - as previously stated.
Furthermore:If that perception were by its own nature, who would remove that perception? The same method applies to the rest [of the things] too. Hence this is a non-criticism.
If the perception of water in a mirage were by its own nature, who indeed would remove it?For an intrinsic nature cannot be: e.g., the heat of fire, the fluidity of water, the openness of space’. Its removal, however, is seen.The intrinsic nature of the perception is, therefore, void. The same method is to be understood with regard to the rest of the things, viz., the five things beginning with the object to be perceived- In these circumstances, your statement that all things are non-void because of the existence of’ the aggregate of the six, is not valid.
The case being the same, we have already answered by what precedes [the objection of] absence of reason, which was stated in [your] refutation of the example of the mirage.
It should be understood that by the preceding deliberation we have also answered [the objection of] absence of reason.The same deliberation regarding the negation of the aggregate of the six, which was stated in the preceding reason, should also be considered here.
We have already answered [the question relating to] the reason [for a negation] in the three times, for the case is the same. And a counter-reason for the three times is obtained for the upholders of the doctrine of voidness.
It has to be understood that the question why a negation is possible in the three times has already received. -Why? -Because the reason is of the same nature as the thesis to be established.To explain: In virtue of your statement, a negation is not possible in the three times, and, like the negation, the thing to be negated, also, does not exist. Thus, there being no negation and no object to be negated, your opinion that the negation has been negated, is untenable.That very reason which expresses a negation of the three times is obtained for the upholders of the doctrine of voidness, for they negate the intrinsic nature of all things, - not for you.Or it has been answered in the following way: ‘I do not negate anything, nor is there anything to be negated. You, therefore, calumniate me when you say: “You negate”’.Now, if you think: the negation is established in all the three; we see the antecedent cause, the subsequent cause, and the simultaneous cause: antecedent cause, e.g., the father as the cause of the son; subsequent cause, e.g., the disciple as the cause of the teacher; simultaneous cause, e.g., the lamp as the cause of the light,- we reply: this is not so. For in this way are stated the three former defects.Moreover, if this is so, you admit the existence of a negation, and you abandon your proposition. The negation of an intrinsic nature is also established in this way.
All things prevail for him, for whom prevails this voidness. Nothing prevails for him for whom voidness does not prevail.
For whom this voidness prevails, for him all things - mundane and supramundane - prevail. - Why? -Because Dependent Origination prevails for him for whom voidness prevails. The Four Noble Truths prevail for him for whom Dependent Orignation prevails. The results of monastic life as well as all special acquisitions prevail for him whom the Four Noble Truths prevail.The Three Jewels, viz., the Buddha, the Dharma and the Saṃgha, prevail for him for whom all the special acquisitions prevail.For whom Dependent Origination prevails, for him merit, the cause of merit, the result of merit, demerit, the cause of demerit, the result of demerit, - all these prevail.For whom merit and demerit, the causes of merit and demerit and the results merit and demerit prevail, for him passion, the origination of passion, and the objective grounds of passion prevail.For whom all that prevails, for him the law concerning the happy and the unhappy states, the attainment of those states, the way leading to those states, the act of passing beyond those states, the means of passing beyond those states, and all worldly conventions are established.They are to be understood individually by each person, following this direction: a part [only] can be taught in words.I adore that incomparable Buddha who taught Voidness, Dependent Origination and the Middle Way as equivalent.
Here ends this work of the venerable master Nāgārjuna.